SE-0439: Update to address acceptance decision (#2623)
swiftlang/swift-evolution: proposals/0439-trailing-comma-lists.md

* Author: [Mateus Rodrigues](https://github.com/mateusrodriguesxyz)
* Review Manager: [Xiaodi Wu](https://github.com/xwu)
* Status: **Accepted with modifications**
* Implementation: `main` https://github.com/swiftlang/swift/pull/74522#
* Previous Proposal: [SE-0084](0084-trailing-commas.md)
* Review: ([pitch](https://forums.swift.org/t/pitch-allow-trailing-comma-in-tuples-arguments-and-if-guard-while-conditions/70170)), ([review](https://forums.swift.org/t/se-0439-allow-trailing-comma-in-comma-separated-lists/72876)), ([acceptance](https://forums.swift.org/t/accepted-with-modifications-se-0439-allow-trailing-comma-in-comma-separated-lists/73216))

## Introduction

> This proposal aims to allow the use of trailing commas, currently restricted to array and dictionary literals, in symmetric delimited comma-separated lists.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This proposal aims to allow the use of trailing commas, currently restricted to array and dictionary literals, in symmetrically delimited comma-separated lists.
```

]
```

> Swift's support for trailing commas in array and dictionary literals makes easier to append, remove, reorder, or comment out the last element as any other element.

Reviewer: Not sure I understand this change: the result is ungrammatical.

## Proposed solution

> This proposal adds support for trailing commas in symmetric delimited comma-separated lists, which are the following:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This proposal adds support for trailing commas in symmetrically delimited comma-separated lists, which are the following:
```

    ])
    ```

- Closure capture lists.

    ```swift
    { [
        capturedValue1,
        capturedValue2,
    ] in
    }
    ```

- Generic parameters.

    ```swift
    struct S<
        T1,
        T2,
        T3,
    > { }
    ```

> - String interpolation

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- String interpolation.
```

    ```swift
    let s = "\(1, 2,)"
    ```

## Detailed Design

> Trailing commas will be supported in comma-separated lists when symmetric delimiters (including `(...)`, `[...]`, and `<...>`) enables unambiguous parsing.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Trailing commas will be supported in comma-separated lists when symmetric delimiters (including `(...)`, `[...]`, and `<...>`) enable unambiguous parsing.
```

> Note that the requirement of symmetric delimiters means that the following cases will not support trailing comma:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Note that the requirement for symmetric delimiters means that the following cases will not support trailing comma:
```

- `if`, `guard` and `while` condition lists.

    ```swift
    if
        condition1,
        condition2, ❌
    { }

    while
        condition1,
        condition2, ❌
    { }

    guard
        condition1,
        condition2, ❌
    else { }
    ```
    

> - Enum case label lists:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Enum case label lists.
```

    ```swift
    enum E {
      case
         a,
         b,
         c, ❌
    }
    ```

- `switch` case labels.

    ```swift
    switch number {
        case
            1,
            2, ❌
        :
            ...
        default:
            ..
    }
    ```
    
- Inheritance clauses.

    ```swift
    struct S:
        P1,
        P2,
        P3, ❌
    { }
    ```

- Generic `where` clauses.

    ```swift
    struct S<
        T1,
        T2,
        T3,
    > where
        T1: P1,
        T2: P2, ❌
    { }
    ```

Trailing commas will be allowed in single-element lists but not in zero-element lists, since the trailing comma is actually attached to the last element. 
Supporting a zero-element list would require supporting _leading_ commas, which isn't what this proposal is about.

```swift
(1,) // OK
(,) ❌ expected value in tuple
```

## Source compatibility

This is a purely additive change with no source compatibility impact.

## Alternatives considered

### Allow trailing comma in all comma-separated lists

> Comma-separated lists that are not symmetric delimited could also benefit from trailing comma, condition lists, for example, which reordering is fairly common. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Comma-separated lists that are not symmetrically delimited could also benefit from trailing comma support; for example, condition lists, in which reordering is fairly common.
```

> However, these lists currently rely on the penultimate element trailing comma to determine that what comes next is the last element, and some of them present challenges to rely on open/close delimiters instead.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
However, these lists currently rely on the comma after the penultimate element to determine that what comes next is the last element, and some of them present challenges if relying on opening/closing delimiters instead.
```

> At first sight, `{` may seem a reasonable close delimiter for `if` and `while` conditions lists, but conditions can have a `{` themselves.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
At first sight, `{` may seem a reasonable closing delimiter for `if` and `while` condition lists, but conditions can have a `{` themselves.
```

```swift
if
    condition1,
    condition2,
    { true }(),
{ }
```

> This particular case can be somehow handled but given how complex conditions can be it's hard to conclude that there's absolutely no corner case where ambiguity can arise in currently valid code.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This particular case can be handled but, given how complex conditions can be, it's hard to conclude that there's absolutely no corner case where ambiguity can arise in currently valid code.
```

> Inheritance lists and generic `where` clauses lists can appear in protocol definitons where there's no clear delimiter, making it harder to disambiguate where the list ends. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Inheritance lists and generic `where` clauses can appear in protocol definitons where there's no clear delimiter, making it harder to disambiguate where the list ends. 
```

```swift
protocol Foo {
  associatedtype T:
      P1,
      P2, ❌ Expected type
  ...
}
```

```swift
protocol Foo {
  associatedtype T:
      P1,
      P2, ❌ Expected type
  ...
}
```

> Although some comma-separated lists without symmetric delimiters may have a clear terminator in some case, this proposal restrict trailing comma to symmetric delimited ones where it's clear that the presence of a trailing comma will not cause parsing ambiguity.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Although some comma-separated lists without symmetric delimiters may have a clear terminator in some cases, this proposal restrict trailing comma support to symmetrically delimited ones where it's clear that the presence of a trailing comma will not cause parsing ambiguity.
```

> Because of these problems this proposal focus solely on symmetric delimited comma-separated lists.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

This is the same content as the preceding sentence?

This was even [proposed](https://forums.swift.org/t/se-0257-eliding-commas-from-multiline-expression-lists/22889/188) and returned for revision back in 2019.

The two approaches are not mutually exclusive. There remain unresolved questions about how the language can accommodate elided commas, and adopting this proposal does not prevent that approach from being considered in the future.

## Revision History

> - Update to address acceptance decision of restrict trailing comma in the case of of symmetric delimiters.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Update to address acceptance decision of restricting trailing comma to lists with symmetric delimiters.
```
